# Facial Expression Recognition

## Introduction
For this problem I used the Toronto Faces Dataset, where the task was to classify images of faces based on their expression. Additionally, I was given access to 2925 labeled images for training and validation. The goal was to write a program that would achieve the highest accuracy on an unseen test set. In addition to the 2925 labeled data, I was provided with 98,058 unlabeled images that was used to pretrain the CNN (details below). Achieved 9th or 98 entries https://inclass.kaggle.com/c/csc411f15-facial-expression-prediction.

### a. High-Level Introduction
There were essentially three flavours of classifiers that were used as a way to solve the problem of facial expression recognition. (1) The first was required, the baseline, which is essentially a K-NN classifier. In this instance, classification was conducted using 10-fold cross validation with varying K’s, with the facial images at full scale, but normalized. Later classification with K-NN was done with a varying number of principal components derived from the unlabeled set. (2) The second classifier that was used was multi-class support vector machines. It was chosen due to its property of soft-separation of classes and the fact that it is a popular classifier. Similar to (1), training and test images were used at full scale, and classification was done with varying number of principal components. (3) The final classification method that was used was a convolutional neural network. It was chosen due to its general success in image classification. The CNN was first pre-trained, by first training a denoising auto-encoder on the unlabeled set, and then using its encoder as a model to train for classification using the training and validation sets.

On the validation set the classifier that performed best was the convolutional neural network. This classifier, when fully trained, was used on the public and hidden test sets with good results. In the following, I will discuss this classifier in relation to the other two alternatives.
